How many?
Freshmen?
Freshmen.
28.
And the total number in those days of an outfit, total enrollment would have been about how many?
60?
About that, yeah.
Describe for me
a typical academic day's routine.
What time did you get up and what did you do when and so forth?
Well, we marched to breakfast at 7, and we were in class by 8.
In fact, we may have had even some 7 o'clock classes.
I can't remember.
It was a long day.
I know that.
But we went to class at 8.
and spent really most of the eight to five time in class.
And we also had Saturday morning classes.
And occasionally you'd have an hour between classes free.
What would you do with that hour?
Well, if you were a freshman, you were supposed to go back to your room.
Did you do that?
We had, incidentally, we had our class schedule posted on our doors, so everybody knew when everybody was supposed to be there, or anyone was supposed to be there.
But I do remember that the pre-med chemistry course had one hour less of a lab than the major chemistry course.
And I had inadvertently put down the extra hour on my schedule.
So I had one hour a week of total freedom.
And when I was in high school, I'd worked at the library, at the Cushing Library.
In those years I had closed stacks and somebody had to go back and get the books for a person.
And so I was familiar with the library and the people knew me.
And so I would go back into the stacks and find a desk, and there were occasionally at the end of the
an area where a faculty member or a student had a desk for study or reading.
And so I would put my head down on the desk and I would sleep or nearly sleep for an hour.
The main thing I remember after the first year was we were always so tired, you know, because you had all the schoolwork and you had that military work and you had the freshmen's activities.
Right.
Now, what were those freshmen activities?
Well, actually, I spoke of going to Mess at 7 in the morning.
Prior to that, we had made up our bed and cleaned up, straightened up our room.
Then I went down the hall, as the other freshmen did, to an upperclassmen's room and made up the two beds in that room and straightened it up.
Then we fell into formation and marched to breakfast.
And I can't remember if we did the same thing at noon, but we did in the evening, too.
But you were pretty much the servant of an upperclassman, or any upperclassman.
Do you recall?
either involving you or any of your acquaintances, any pranks from those days that were?
Well, I remember one of the happiest moments of my life was when I, there was one day that the freshman had a chance to sort of get even with the upper glassman.
Okay.
It was so nice to have a dirty,
sort of garbage can sort of thing, half full of water and throw it on a sophomore.
That was a very pleasant moment for me.
And was there a particular sophomore that was the target?
I don't remember who it was, but it was more because he was there than he was.
You say it was more than that?
No, he was just available.
Well, do you remember anything that you or anybody else pulled off that was really special?
No, not really.
I might add that the upperclassmen used the board some.
It was not just constant in our outfit.
We had one of the better outfits from one of the freshmen.
What would be the occasion of their using the board?
Well, if they felt that you were not doing what you wanted to do, what they wanted you to do, or if they just started to beat somebody, you know.
And then at the end of the year,
you had your sole handle beaten off, meaning you weren't called fish anymore.
And you had to have two or three upperclassmen sort of, I guess, beat it off.
Right.
Now your dad came back to the campus when?
Hmm?
He came back.
Your dad is back on campus at the time you were a freshman.
Yes.
Yeah.
Did anybody ever give you a hard time
because of you being a faculty brat?
Well, I can...
Yes and no.
Dad, at the time of the legislature investigation of the A&M in the spring of 1947, he was one of the administration witnesses.
And I can remember being sort of sarcastically treated by an upperclassman, but not in my outfit, because Dad was, of course,
Obviously, he was just not in favor of physical hazing.
And as commandant, in the previous decade, he had been fairly successful in controlling it, actually, but with a lot of student reaction to that.
And so I had grown up in that sort of background.
And I can remember that one occasion when somebody was really pretty sarcastic.
But generally, I might have even been treated a little more with kid gloves occasionally.
Now, your dad became Commandant when?
He became Commandant in 1935.
1935.
And so he serves until he goes away to the...
To the war?
No, he was that for two years.
Oh, okay.
And actually his policies of control of hazing were such that there was sort of a student rebellion.
Not leaving classes or anything, but a very strong reaction.
And the board
I think preferred to keep things from not rocking the boat.
And so after two years as commandant, he actually went to the physical education department and served as a professor of physical education in those years.
But one of the interesting things is
Having been here for 15 years before he became commandant, and also as a coach having seen sort of the student element of life, that had really some progressive ideas.
For example, if the student's in an outfit, he tried to get this over to the company, the battery commanders, that, you know, if you have distinguished students, you should give them a little more time.
And there was apparently only one unit in the whole corps that went along with this, but it led the corps academically, freshman.
And in that sort of rough and rowdy time, there was not a small amount of furniture torn up and destroyed.
In fact, I can remember going with Ed.
I was sort of tagging along with him one day when he inspected a room.
This was after the semester was over, but somebody had just torn up everything in it.
And the second year, they instituted a plan in which all the money is saved, or at least one of the two years, all the money saved from not having to replace things would be set aside to buy special things
equipment or whatnot that the students would use.
And apparently, you know, there was a substantial saving affected by that.
And he also instituted a rule in which you had to pass a certain number of hours to be allowed to stay in a dormitory.
which was sort of an effort toward making people academically achieved.
Now, the number of hours was like six.
I mean, by our standards now it would just be sort of funny, but at that time it was not so funny.
And the problem that occurred was that the son of one of the directors did not make that level.
And a dean came to dad and said, so forth, sons, he's not being allowed to stay in the dormitory because of this rule.
And dad would not relent on it, and apparently then the president was talked to, and he decided it'd be better to change the rule.
Now, your dad was
Am I correct in remembering that his nickname was Colonel Andy?
Yes.
Throughout his later years, from the 30s on?
Yes, that's right.
The, back to your own case, did you all refer to roommates as fish old ladies?
Did you have a roommate who was your fish old lady?
Well, yeah, I don't think, Bill Eccles and I didn't use that term too much, but that's a term that's used, yeah.
Did you all have any, I'll say game, did you all have any games you all played at meal time?
Any routines that were... Well, as a freshman, you had to serve the upperclassmen, and you'd serve them more or less in order of their seniority.
I know to my left at the end of the table there was a junior, and then the sophomore was on my right, so the junior would be passed everything first.
And the freshman did the passing.
And so the freshman got what was left over.
And we were not allowed to have desserts at all.
unless the University of Texas was beaten in football, which never happened, of course.
So we didn't have desserts.
And we had to eat.
They wanted to sort of let us know we were still freshmen.
In addition to serving, we would eat a square meal, which basically meant you had to raise your fork vertically from the plate
and then turn a right angle and it got to the level of your mouth and then go to the mouth and then so forth down and so on.
Did, during that time, what is your recollection of the quality of the food that was served?
I think it was satisfactory.
It was not bad, no.
Do you have any recollections of what your favorite main course was or courses?
What did you enjoy most?
I don't really recall, Haskell.
I don't know that I had a favorite.
Do you remember any that was particular at the other end of the scale that you really didn't like?
Well, it was sort of volume food and sort of a lot of hasher, pudding, and of course, pudding was more dessert, but I mean even for the... Now, were you eating in Duncan or Cebiza?
Duncan Hall.
And let's see.
And you said that the other day that it was, as far as you know, it was pronounced Sbisa.
Sbisa.
Uh-huh.
Let's see.
And did you all have an outfit that was a, was your rival?
Was there anybody that your,
was kind of paired against?
No, not that I recall.
We lived, at least as a freshman, I mean, the second floor of dormitory, too, was my almost whole environment.
The quartermasters were below, and the coast artillery was above us.
A freshman didn't attempt to walk in those areas if he could possibly avoid it, and we had no real rivalry with them.
In those years right after the war, was there any outfit that you recall now that had highest prestige and any that had the other end of the lowest prestige?
Well, I think probably F Company Infantry probably was the quintessential cadet corps company when I was there, when I was a freshman.
And a former drill instructor was the
company commander.
And Benny Zinn, whose dad was a student in the dean of men's office, his dad had been, I think, a lieutenant colonel in the war, was in F infantry.
And that was a, they were a lot
on their freshman than F battery or most of the artillery.
I think a lot of the people in the artillery were people who were trying to get a college education.
I think some of those other units, sometimes some question about that.
How did life for a student change as a sophomore?
Well, actually, after my F battery was dismantled after my first year.
And I went home and just lived at home after that.
And I was theoretically assigned a B battery, which is an excellent unit.
But I didn't show up for drill too often.
That was not one contact with them.
Were you happy with that arrangement to live at home?
Sure.
Yeah.
Were, was there a nickname in those days for a cadet that lived off campus?
A cadet who lived off campus was called a Day Duck.
It was a Day Duck then?
Okay.
Now, I never considered myself a Day Duck since I'd been a freshman on campus, because I'd paid my dues, so to speak.
A minute ago, I said something about the artillery, and my dad, when he was at Fort Sill, who was, in addition to going through the two artillery schools, at least intermittently, president of a board that reviewed cases of people who wanted to transfer from one part of the military to another, and also interviewed young men who wanted to go to officer candidate school.
And Hal Carr, who was a distinguished alumnus of A&M, and later became president of an airline, told me that he went for the board that my dad was president of, wanting to change from the artillery to the Air Corps.
and probably was fortunate he did because his career later was in aviation.
But he said that my dad said to him, Lieutenant, why could you possibly want to leave the artillery?
This is the branch of Napoleon.
And Dad's view of at least the ground forces was that there were three parts of the army one would want to be in.
The artillery, the infantry, and cavalry, or armored as it was called.
And he felt that the dumb guys went in the infantry and the army.
That was his view.
His view of the army.
Now he did accept the engineers and the medical corps, but beyond that, that was it.
As you look back on those undergraduate years, were there some memorable teachers, advisors that had an important role in your life?
Well, yes.
Mr. Brayton, who taught freshman chemistry, was just an awfully nice person, and he did a good job of teaching it, too.
It may have been Dr. Brayton, but Mr. and I liked him.
He initiated that, I presume, at least was director of it for years.
Dr. Potter was a pre-med advisor, and he
In fact, his graduate anatomy course, the sophomore course, was sort of the one that decided whether or not you were going to medical school almost.
And I thought he was a good teacher.
He did not cut corners, and he didn't expect the students to either.
In the non-sciences, I might mention Dr. Gravett, who later became a pre-med advisor, taught me embryology, and I thought he was quite a gentlemanly person and a very good teacher.
He later was my patient, and Dr. Potter had passed away when I came to practice, but Mrs. Potter was my patient for 20 years, I guess.
I liked Ralph Steen.
He taught Texas history.
I thought he was a stimulating teacher.
What made him such?
I've heard many words of praise.
What was it that he did?
He was a rather business-like person.
I mean, you know, he was not casual at all, but he was well organized, and he just said a lot of interesting things, you know.
But he got your attention and kept it, too, I might add.
It was interesting to the student.
Harrison Hurst taught me Shakespeare.
He was a very nice teacher, a very good man.
Of course, you know him in church.
One person who did not teach me, but who I remember, because one of his classes was across the wall from a German class I took, was Al Nelson.
I was going to guess that's who you were going to revert.
And my German teacher was a Mr. Rothrock, who was a tiny, just a very small person, very thin and very not tall at all.
And I can remember once Dr. Nelson, I don't think he liked to be called doctor, but he was.
But when he was making, he could, his voice could attain a high level, I mean like a
screech or scream or certainly a shout, and just, you know, within a word almost, you know, and this high volume suddenly increased next door, and Mr. Rothrock went to the blackboard and banged on it.
I remember that, but it didn't stop the noise at all.
But Al Nelson was later my patient as well as Mrs. Nelson, and they had cataracts and surgery.
And over the period of time, I knew him as a patient who we talked about a lot of things.
And I mentioned that my father grew up reading the Hinty books.
And he was an English author and wrote historical books for young boys.
And I read all Daddy's Hindi books and enjoyed them.
And then Dr. Gowen's lived next to us in our second house, and Dr. Gowen had grown up on the Hindi books and had kept them just as Dad had.
And so I read all of his.
At some point I decided I wanted to read, you know.
They were among my favorite ones.
And then later Mrs. Walton, I used to go down and go through their library, and of course they'd had two sons, so they had all the books from them too.
But going back to Al Nelson, I mentioned something about the Hindi books, and he said that they were the books that caused, and he had them,
They had kept them.
They were the books that had pointed him toward history.
Really?
After he passed away, Mrs. Nelson lived a few years.
I have his hitty books.
Oh, yes.
How marvelous.
She gave them to me.
But do you remember any, this would be kind of non-class work, do you remember anybody who was important to you as an advisor, a counselor?
Well, Tommy Mayo actually advised some, gave me some advice about what I might read.
I remember the first book was Benvenuto Cellini, which was his autobiography.
He was very nice.
I liked him.
Of course, he was the head librarian when I was working there as a student.
Describe him, because his career is long and very important to A&M.
I know nothing about what he looked like or anything.
Describe him physically and emotionally and so forth.
I would say he was
about six feet tall and not thin, but not overweight markedly by any means.
He may have been a slight, you know, sort of actually just an average physique, but maybe a little on the slightly chubby side, but not grossly overweight at all.
a person who was not overbearing at all.
Really, in a crowd, probably a fairly quiet person, but I think a very good conversationalist among friends and so forth.
Of course, he had a literary bend, obviously with being a professor of English.
The library I know had a music room that I think was largely due to his influence and the students of that era could go up and check out symphonies and that sort of thing.
You mean records?
Records, yes.
There was a room set aside for that that I think was entirely his
an indication of his interest in bringing cultural circumstances to the student body.
Can you generalize about his leadership style as a librarian?
He was not a hands-on leader.
I think he more or less
indicated to his staff in the library, and I think probably in the English department, because he was head there too, not necessarily at the same time.
I had the impression he delegated things to people, but people knew what they were supposed to do.
He was not one of these people who was looking over one's shoulder all the time.
Now, a little aside to this of a later nature is that when he died, Dad and Luther Jones were their co-executors.
And he had apparently just a lot of mail, U.S.
postage mail, that had not been opened over, you know, two years or something like that.
And sometimes it'd be a check, you know.
But he didn't bother with the mundane things of that nature.
Now, was his personality affected at all by where he grew up?
Was he southerner, northerner?
Yes, he was a Mississippian.
I think may have grown up in Oxford, where I think the State University is, and was a Rhodes Scholar later.
Boy, I didn't know that.
A Rhodes Scholar?
Yes.
I came here.
His mother was a rather dominant person and apparently must have outlived her husband many years, and so he took care of his mother for probably 20 years or something, which I think probably sort of limited his contacts and social sense outside of what she would be interested in at least.
Now the YMCA, when you start,
was the kind of the activity center of the campus.
Yes.
What all happened at the Y?
Well, among the activities, among the things they had for activities, were ping pong tables in the lobby.
And I became really quite a good ping pong player playing there.
And when we finally moved off campus,
A large porch was constructed, large enough for a ping pong table.
So I continued my interest.
But we played ping pong there many, many hours.
Of course, I mentioned the swimming pool, which, incidentally, there was a swimming pool in the basement of the YMCA prior to my memory.
And then I remember a bowling alley being there, but I was not too interested in bowling.
But I never played, I guess, maybe played one time or something.
But the kids used to roller skate around that area and on the sidewalks.
And Mr. Cashin was the director in your memory.
Yes.
And then followed by?
Was it Gordon Gay?
Gordon Gay would have been next, yeah.
And I think that more or less completed the YMCA time because the Memorial Student Center took over the functions of the YMCA largely as time went on.
Now, the MSC construction begins about when?
It began about the time I graduated.
So about 1950?
Somewhere in the 49, 50 area, maybe 51.
I remember being there, if it weren't for a dedication, it was for some event when there was a groundbreaking of some sort.
And I don't recall if I were back from med school on the weekend, on a Saturday or something,
But it was more or less about 1950.
Were people excited about the coming of the MSC?
Well, I don't know.
There must have been, yes.
I mean, I was not sort of participating in all that, but it was a wonderful thing and a wonderful, you know, it offered so many
It just expanded both the recreational and later the cultural element of the university.
Do you remember any great events, great in your life at Guyon Hall?
I remember when I was in medical school, Randolph Churchill spoke, the son of the prime minister.
At that time, he was, oh, I don't know, 40-something, I guess.
And the one thing I do remember specifically was that he stated that he thought socialized medicine was a good idea.
And, of course, he came from a more conservative element of society.
But I think the English had decided that the services were more continuous for the whole population.
People were not physically, financially, I mean, overall.